former National Security Council member
Gary sick mister sick joins us to
discuss his recent book October Surprise
America's hostages in Iran and the
election of Ronald Reagan in his book
mr. sick explores the theory that the
1980 Reagan Bush campaign negotiated
with the Iranian government to delay the
release of 52 American hostages until
after Reagan's 1991 inauguration he also
examines the implications of such an
agreement and its possible effect on the
1980 presidential election and now book
notes
[Music]
Guerry sick author of the book October
Surprise in the introduction you say
that a book such as this can only serve
as a cautionary tale why'd you write
that because that's exactly the way I
feel about it that you can't go back and
refight the election of 1980 you can't
charge bill Casey he's dead you can't
really do much of anything about it
except to warn people that this sort of
thing goes on and that they should watch
out for it and I think that that's the
important part of the book
it obviously has political significance
and other things but fundamentally it's
to warn people that if the democratic
process is going to work you have to be
careful in the event that somebody's
been hiding under a rock over the last
couple months this book is about what
this book is about the attempt by the
Reagan Bush campaign to meet with the
Iranians and delay the release of the
American hostages until after the
election and have them delivered to
Ronald Reagan instead of Jimmy Carter to
try to affect the outcome of the
election in 1980 why did you write it
it's an easy question and it's a long
answer I didn't know I was going to
write this book even three years ago
when I started doing the research I I
sent out to write a book about the
Reagan administration's involvement with
Iran and I thought that I was going to
deal primarily with the iran-contra
affair as time went along I started
working on the book and I decided that
to to really talk about the iran-contra
affair and to talk about the Reagan
dealings with Iran you had to look at
what happened in 1980 that was where it
all began and as I started doing the
research on this and I thought that
would be rather quick and easy I found
that that was a story in itself
and it just got bigger and bigger until
finally I had to make a decision do I go
ahead and write the book I intended to
write or do I write something else I
finally decided I had to
right this other book so this is a this
is a mistake
this was never intended to happen I
noticed in in the either the
introduction to closed that you signed
this off of September of 1990 this is
only a couple months later how did this
book come out so fast it really is
pretty amazing
I wrote a an article an op-ed article
for the Washington for the New York
Times in April April 15th 1991 and it
attracted a good deal of attention and
Random House came to me in May and said
they would like to do the book and so in
mid-may we sat down and had a discussion
about what I could do unfortunately I
had not written the book before I wrote
the article I should have of course
terrible mistake and I so they said okay
how quickly can you write this book and
I took a very deep breath and I said
August and they said all right we're
gonna lay down a schedule and we will go
ahead and plan for production and
everything else to get the book out in
January and so I started writing
furiously I disappeared from sight from
May 15th until literally the end of
August and finally I surfaced again with
the full manuscript I gave it to the
people at Random House Times books they
gave me two superb editors who took the
book and spent about two weeks tearing
it apart and putting it back together
again then we had negotiations over that
and when I signed off on that in
September that was when we had put the
final touches on that manuscript but
even after that we went ahead making
changes and fixes into October and then
they put it straight into the press it
came out and literally from was out then
on November 11th actually the first
books came off the press I actually held
one in my hand on November 6th which it
was really only a month after we had
stopped making final changes to the
thing so it's an extraordinary piece of
work and they
clearly decided to go quickly because
the story keeps moving and they didn't
want a lot of the story to get away
before the book came out as it turned
out the timing was really remarkable you
actually write it yourself I certainly
did every word what do you do for a
living right
where's home I live in Manhattan have an
apartment I have been I was gainfully
employed up until about three or four
years ago when my kids graduated from
college and I decided that since I'd
been spending most of my money on their
very expensive educational habits
I was now free to either start
accumulating some of that money or to do
without it and I decided to do without
it I will go to work for myself
researching writing and doing what I
wanted to do I never made a better
decision in my life I have a little tiny
study about the size of this table in my
home I go in I have my computer there
the world's shortest commute from the
bedroom to my little study and that's
where I work I've got a modem I've got a
telephone I've got a fax machine I've
got everything I need I can communicate
with the rest of the world and I sit I
research I write and I have a very good
time and do you work for any other
institution yeah I'm an adjunct
professor of Middle East politics of
Columbia and that this semester means
I'm teaching a class once a week is this
a political book in other words did but
maybe I can ask it better did this book
come out because you want to affect the
process or did it come out because you
want to make money well I never have any
objection to making money that's
perfectly acceptable and I think any
author that says they don't want to make
money on their book has got to be crazy
but I wrote it you know I was in the
White House when this happened when the
election of 1980 took place and I had a
chance to witness these things firsthand
I wrote another book called all fall
down about the Iranian Revolution and
the hostage crisis and the way I the way
it looked from my vantage point and when
I started going through this again what
I had to do in this book was actually to
go back and
reexamine a whole body of history that I
thought I had known and it was like
tearing the PIO off an onion you kept
pulling it back and saying wait a minute
I thought I knew what happened at that
time and then deciding discovering that
in fact you'd only known part of the
story so it was a discovery process it
was a mystery story I'm an analyst by
vocation I spent 24 years in the Navy as
a intelligence analyst naval
intelligence and I ended up as a Navy
captain and spent a lot of my life in
fact all of my life for all practical
purposes amidst in one way or another
putting together complex puzzles this is
perhaps the most complex puzzle I'd ever
run into and so there was a real
challenge at doing this and then finally
as I got into the material and became
and came to a you know to have a serious
grasp of this massive stuff I think I
felt a certain obligation if people
carry out this kind of nefarious
political activity they get away with it
and they win elections and nobody ever
calls them on it what that means for the
democratic system is we're gonna have
more of that they're going to do it
again and the word in Washington among
the insiders who know these things will
be this works try it you'll like it
so I felt that the least I could do was
to put the thing out in public and say
here it is here's the evidence that's
persuaded me see if it'll persuade you
and if so at least holding that up as a
warning signal to other people to say
wait a minute maybe you can't get away
with the next time as you know I've got
them right here there have been a couple
of publications that have worked this
whole theory over pretty good one of
them is a cover story and the November
18th New Republic cameras kind of far
away will get up closer so you can see
what this cover looks like people
probably seen this understand
the question is what October surprise
and inside
this is written by Steve Emerson and
Jesse Furman
let me just read one paragraph almost
every primary source cited by sick or
frontline has been indicted or was the
subject of a federal investigation prior
to claiming to be a participant in the
October Surprise finally evidence we
have uncovered shows that William Casey
and George Bush could not have been
present at the meetings alleged by the
sources first of all remember that Steve
Emerson wrote that piece although it
says November 18th on the cover in the
peculiar world of magazine publishing in
fact it was published a full week before
my book came out on the 11th so it was
in I read it a week before and Emerson
interviewed me for this and I said look
my my book is going to deal with these
issues in some detail and the use of
sources that you're alleging and this
article simply aren't true
he chose not to use my information and
not to wait for the book so this was
written before the book came out and
does not in any way reflect what I've
done in the book because he didn't know
what I was doing in the book other than
what I just told him in the interview as
a result the article is kind of odd in a
sense because what it does is it creates
a sort of hypothetical conspiracy
theorist who believes in this story and
says here is this mythical individual
and if they believe in this they must
believe in the Tooth Fairy because
there's this and there's that in it and
it sets up a whole array of straw men
and then knocks them down but as I told
Steve in our interview before he
published this many of the sources the
first five or six pages of this article
are devoted to one source Richard
brenneke I don't use him at all and in
fact with all due modesty I believe that
I debunked Richard Rennick II more
effectively than Steve Emerson does so
this debunking effort I think
as you know slightly misguided and off
the mark but the charge in there about
the sources indicate the Casey could not
possibly have been in Madrid are just
I've just simply false they in Emerson
had talked to a guy in London who said
that Casey was at a conference we had
known the case he was at a conference in
London and he was there for about a day
and a half and he the records are a
little fuzzy but let's call it a day and
a half that he was in London he was
missing for four to five days he had
left the states and on the on Friday or
Saturday night came back on Wednesday
and are you talking about so in case the
audience had Oh
October 1980 this is this is this is
July of 1980 July of nineteen that's
right and the allegation that I make is
that the source that I talked to who was
an eyewitness who was there at the
meetings said that Casey was in Madrid
during this period of time and we had
actually traced Casey's movements
outside the country and nobody had ever
admitted the case he was outside the
country in Madrid meeting with that he
was in the Madrid meeting with an
Iranian representative Mac Tico Ruby who
at the time was an associate of
Khomeini's today he is the Speaker of
the modulus the Parliament in Iran doing
what making a deal that this was where
in fact the deal began that resulted in
the delay of the hostages and the
release of the hostages to the Reagan
administration so my source had talked
about this and we traced Casey out of
the country and they say well he was in
London he was in London there's
absolutely no doubt about he was in
London for a day and a half all day
Monday and half of Tuesday he left on
Friday or Saturday he didn't get back in
till Wednesday
there was plenty of time Madrid is
thirty minutes
I mean it's 90 minutes from from London
by plane and was used routinely as a
shuttle point to go back and forth to
Madrid for these people that were
operating on this operation so I just
don't agree with the article at all and
I I do wish that the article
that in the Newsweek article had waited
until after the book came out so that
they could have in fact dealt with what
I said
not with this mythical individual who
supposedly is a believer in a conspiracy
theory I don't identify with the
individual that they create
iein sees the cover now of making of a
myth the October Surprise which is also
a debunking of your book exactly in fact
the two articles came out the same day
and are really quite similar ok you know
a lot of people are accusing you all
kinds of things in writing this book
let's go back to these articles and I
want to ask you what's the motive of the
New Republic which is owned by Marty
parrots and what's the in your opinion
the motive of Newsweek which is owned by
the Washington Post Company I don't
think it's my business to examine their
motives they are examining mine they say
I'm a dupe that I've been taken to the
cleaners by these people that they think
that I'm being used for political
purposes and so forth I'm not going to
all I can say is that the articles came
out together quite some more one week
and as far as I know they didn't work on
these things together well I take that
back in fact the Newsweek article refers
to the two Emerson's article and so
forth so they were in contact with each
other before this time and they use
exactly the same pieces of evidence
they've talked to the same people and
they go about it in very much the same
way presumably their moodiness that they
didn't believe the story I you know I
find it difficult to believe in it the
part that really bothers me about both
of these stories is that if you look at
the end of the Newsweek story it ends up
saying that maybe this whole thing began
with a big misunderstanding and what if
the people that were talking in London
to the American representative the the
Carter representative thought they were
really talking to the Republicans and
this was all just a case of mistaken
identity I mean this is just wildly
speculative I was in the government at
the time I know about
meeting the went on with the American
representative him it definitely there
was no case of mistaken identity and I
told them that also but they seem to
like this theory and they ran with it
and I honestly don't understand what was
going on here let me ask you this and
maybe you don't want to deal with Marty
parrots isn't a valid Zionist he
believes very strongly in the State of
Israel he said it on this network any
suspicions that one of the reasons they
would pick this line is because one of
the things you accuse Israel of doing is
being an intermediary and the weapons
well it's a legitimate question and
again I can't examine their motives it
is true that this book is not very
flattering to Israel and that I would
anticipate that that people who feel
strongly that way would feel a need but
as I say the articles in both cases are
not really directed at the book as much
as they are at the the general story
these came out before they either one
neither one of them claimed that they
actually have read this book or are
responding to what it says they're
simply saying in advance what what they
think is going to happen it may in fact
be more of a reaction in some respects
to the sy Hersh book that had come out
just a few weeks earlier which uses one
of these sayings one of the same sources
that I do Arab in minashi who is a
former Israeli intelligence operative
and who plays a prominent role in my
book as well as inside her she's book
and he is saying things that the
Israelis are very very unhappy about so
the fact that that well for instance
that that Steve Emerson got access to
personnel records from the Intelligence
Division in Iran in Israel that
personnel records have area been minashi
which nobody else had been able to lay
their hands on suggests that he had at
least the Israelis were prepared to
cooperate with him on this when he
interviewed me he was in Israel that's
where he was doing his research and
that's where he called me to do the the
interview did you sense by the way when
Steve Emerson called you that he was
come out against what oh yes oh yes I
mean it was very clear know him I'd
known him we had we had talked various
times in the past I was aware of various
stories that he had done in research
that then we had not known each other
well just in passing
how about then this may be really
stretching things but news weeks on by
The Washington Post company and you
first wrote your article in The New York
Times on April the 15th this year where
you laid all this out is there any sense
that there's a competitive thing here
the Washington Post and again I have no
reason to believe that the Washington
Post inspired them to do this no I
really don't think that was that was the
issue
The Washington Post however has been
quite hostile to the story and from the
very beginning as has not been very
receptive to the idea and again I can't
explain the motives of that either but
my impression is that that John Barry
the chief reporter who did this once he
got the information about Casey in
London he quit looking and quit thinking
that there was anything else to look for
that had that disproved everything and
John Berry's British he has British
that's correct
so his connection was in Britain for the
information that he he's he's British
but he works in United States now but it
was his information was his source
British his source was British as a
matter of fact yes and mr. Chadwick at
the Royal Army Medical College
the Royal War Museum was the person who
provided the information about Casey
being in London and you know we had
known about Casey being in London before
we I in my book there's a photograph of
Casey in London I mean and I died that
was put out before these articles were
written so the fact that Casey was in
London certainly didn't come as a
surprise to me it was in the book it was
described and there's a picture of Casey
you know at the during this conference
that he was holding in London so that
didn't come as a as a surprise to me at
all but there's a sense that once that
information was found
once that was lowkey
that that John Berry's simply decided
that everything about this story was
false and I think they just didn't look
hard enough because that in my view does
not mean that this could not have taken
place that there is a and you know I
must say maybe I shouldn't say this but
in order to understand this story
you've got to read it maybe that's not
fair in other words to understand the
anchors I tried to figure out how am I
gonna ask you questions about well only
it really is true you know that and that
in one sense is why I wrote it because
dealing with this subject among the
people that work with it there's a kind
of shorthand you know Hashemi says this
and you know what that's talking about
it you know the first Madrid meeting
this happened and so and you go on and
on for the other for a normal reader for
a normal even well-informed individual
it's impossible to know what this
shorthand is talking about and you need
some kind of a god this book among other
things is an attempt to create a guide
that will easily take a reader through
this very complex story and I hope show
why what the motives would be of the
individuals involved what the evidence
is does it now exists something about
the sources who they are where they come
from what their background is why they
would or would not have access to
certain information and that is a no so
I hope that the book will at least lift
the level of discourse so that anybody
who wants to talk about this subject in
the future at least will have a sort of
set of guide path guideposts set out for
them that you can then know at least
what the baseline of information is and
can go on from there let me talk about
the journalism of this whole thing with
you if we can it seems like some
different people chosen up sides on this
yes there it's really true
how about the network's I notice on page
236 you say three other journalists were
particularly generous and helpful then
you mentioned Terra Sun and shine those
of ABC TV's Nightline took an early
interest in the story introduced me to
some key sources and with her superb
team of researchers broke several parts
of the story did they then have an entry
Dennett once they got to working with
you Tara had started working on this
story before I ever met her and had done
a lot of independent research one of the
interesting things about working on this
story was that I was working on my own I
don't I don't have a research staff I
don't even have a secretary it's just me
and I go do my thing and a lot of the
other reporters and other people who had
become interested in this story over
time for one reason or another mostly
because they thought there was really
something there and they did Ben
overlooked and covered up and that it
needed a lot more digging those
reporters were often working on their
own time they had very little
institutional support they had no
bureaus to draw on they had no research
support for the most part but they were
interested and we didn't have the luxury
of fighting among ourselves in terms of
you know I go first and I'm gonna get
this scooped but basically everybody
that was involved in the story was
interested in the story and was
interested in getting it out and was
interested in finding out what really
happened and it was a rare an unusual
set of circumstances but it was a
pleasure of absolute joy to work on the
story from that point of view that you
didn't have to feel that somebody was
just milking you and they were going to
run off and and publish behind your back
or they were going to be telling stories
about you or something else it was a
good group a smart group and a lot of
and and we did pursue this thing sharing
information among ourselves helping each
other out
sharing sources if I suddenly found that
that there was a lead out on the West
Coast someplace that I couldn't pursue
there was a guy that I worked with out
on the west coast I would call and say
hey if you have a chance could you talk
to so-and-so and he would do that and
call me back and send me a transcript of
the interview or say there's nothing
there and so forth we shared among
ourselves so Tara was one of the people
who I shared information with and others
are named in the book as well does that
mean she has a stake in it I mean that
sideline has a stake in it I don't think
so
it meant that Nightline was ahead of the
game
they had more information faster than
any of the other networks and you know
if there is a professional jealousy
there I think that maybe one of the
sources of it we ever on the ABC payroll
for this I've not been on any payroll of
any organization for this except for the
20th century fund which provided me a
grant to do this book now I have not
worked as a consultant for ABC ever
who's the 20th century fund 20th century
fund is a nonprofit organization in New
York which has been around for many
years and what they specialize in is
giving grants to into for single author
books on policy issues and they've been
doing it for years hiding political no
they're not are they partisan no they
cover the waterfront you think that
they're we're interested in your book
because they knew that the slant it
would take they the proposal that I
wrote for them was not for this book it
was for a much more general book that
was really examining the relationship
between the Reagan administration and
Iran so they didn't they couldn't have
known what they were going to get and
what I did was about the fall of 1989
maybe 90 I went back to them and I said
look I gave you a proposal I promised to
write you a certain kind of a book and I
had a chapter outline and everything I
said I'm not gonna write that book right
now I said you don't owe me a thing and
I said if you want me to I'm gonna just
put that aside for the moment and I'll
come back and write that book for you
later I owe it to you and I'm forgetting
to do that the book that I'm going to
write is going to be very controversial
very messy and it's likely to get
certainly me in trouble but it could get
you in trouble too and you're you know
quite free to just drop out at this
point tell me to go off and do my own
thing and then when I come back we can
do this other book together they thought
seriously about that and said go ahead
and write it and gave me full support
to continue pursuing the subject and
they don't necessarily endorse it I mean
in the sense of saying that this is
their thesis but they thought that it
was an important policy issue and it
needed to be looked at and that's after
all what they were there for and Richard
Liang the president of the foundation is
I just think a terrific guy and I had
great support for them all the way
through they didn't have to do this and
it's a risky thing for them as well for
any nonprofit institution but they took
it where did they get their money
it's an endowment it was given to them I
wish I knew the name of their founder
they all shoot me for not being able to
say that publicly but some years ago a
gentleman of very wealthy gave the money
for this very purpose and the
institution has been going on for I
don't know how many years are you aware
of any other projects that they've
involved in that the audience might be
familiar with gee I wish I had done a
little more homework I mean I I am aware
I mean they've got they put out I think
you know eight books or more a year I
shouldn't be talking just off the cuff
like this because I really haven't done
the research but they they put out a
it's a considerable range of books that
they publish every year what they do is
they take an author on just as if they
were giving him an advance and say we
give you so much time you write a book
for us then when they get the book they
own it they take the book and then they
go to the publishers and say just as if
they this is if they were agent almost
and try to place the book if they can't
place the book then they become a
publisher and they publish the book
themselves but they publish a wide range
of things on European policy on Social
Security on healthcare on foreign policy
I most of its domestic policy though
most of their books focus on domestic
policy rather than on foreign policy but
there are a number of foreign policy
books is this the only book you've done
for them yes your front-line connection
there's a Bob Perry I believe Bob Perry
and Robert Ross see the same Bob Perry
that used to be with Newsweek that's
correct
we've done our show many times here the
reason I bring that up it's interesting
had he still been with news
he might have been involved in this they
said there that's right story Bob Perry
has been interested in this story for a
long long time and he's been working on
it on his own
he couldn't get support at Newsweek in
fact to work on this story and that's
now he's been working on it on his own
of freelancing and then he proposed as I
understand it he proposed this idea of a
special to PBS and hooked up with Robert
Ross who is a television producer who
also speaks Persian - turns out which is
very convenient in this particular thing
and who lived in Iran for a while and
they set to work the two of them to go
out and and do a television version of
what I was doing basically and preempted
let me add this may sound like it's not
all that important but it it just seems
to be a thread through all this going
back to the Newsweek piece I found it
interesting that John Murray's piece led
off by saying the outlet was hardly
prestigious this is for the first part
of this whole story the executive
Intelligence Review which is the
LaRouche publication did you read that I
read the article you know the article
and then it says the next I mean this is
when this I read the Newsweek article
then they points out that when the story
got his next boost in April of 87 who
was in the Miami Herald and then it
moves from there is that nobody paid
much attention to it then and then it
moved the herald story didn't get much
play but when bani-sadr next spoke the
floralis of the New York Times in August
of 87 the story grew the only reason I
mentioned this is that you had access to
the op-ed page of the New York Times on
April the 15th of this year and then the
front line story Iran what the next day
that's correct
how does all this work I mean and and
why is there any of this but no but and
why is it all of a sudden in order to
get the attention that had to get to the
New York Times first what is this what's
that well you know it's a it's an
interesting point because inevitably in
a
complicated or highly controversial
political issue but the time the story
breaks in a big way and comes to a lot
of people's attention it has already
been covered by the alternative media
that's not a long unusual that
alternative presses smaller in these
papers are covering these stories doing
the real investigative reporting and
very frequently the the big newspapers
are busy reporting sort of what is
happening sort of recording history
whereas the littler presses are hungry
they're enthusiastic and they're
energetic and they're out there digging
like crazy and they're coming up with
stuff some of it bad and some of it very
good and usually you'll find that the
origin of the story for instance the in
sloth story would probably better not
get into that a whole a whole nother can
of worms but any big story that you look
at often there was a subterranean press
that that covered it first and some
reporters that were out there digging
who often in the end don't get full
credit for what they do this is simply
another example that people were out
there digging around and the mainstream
press are very slow to pick up on these
things I've found the mainstream press
to be really quite timid in dealing with
a tough political issue one that really
goes to the bone that isn't just sort of
cosmetic a little scandal somebody
misusing funds somebody's sleeping with
somebody else that has you know in the
political arena but really goes to the
heart of the thing maybe that's what it
means to be mainstream is that you're
extremely conservative about making
accusations or carrying things on so how
did I get to the what was your question
how did I get to the the opioid page of
the New York Times or why did they buy
your people why did they bar
well the way it happened was that in the
spring of 1990 a an editor at the op-ed
page the New York Times called me up and
said I've been hearing about this
October Surprise theory and she said she
thought there was quite a story there
and if it was real it was one of the
biggest stories of the decade of all
time and she thought it really ought to
be looked at and wonder what I was doing
I said I am working on it she knew that
I was working on it
she said well would you write something
for us on the thing I said no I'm
definitely not ready yet that I've done
a lot of research but I'm nowhere near
ready to write the story there's just so
much that I don't know and I'm missing
she said well let's stay in touch and I
said she said you have anybody else to
suggest and I suggested two or three
other people that I said they could
contact that might be willing to write a
story for him she called me back and
said well let's stay in touch on this
thing now there's no immediate rush on
the thing so we did for a year and we
would talk every month or two and she
would say you know how are you doing I'd
say well I'm making some progress are
you ready to write and I'd say no and
that was that finally in the spring of
from January 1991 on the tempo of this
really picked up very dramatically we
had a bunch of new sources new things
were coming together Bob Perry and
Robert Ross had been out scouring
territory they had new interview
material I had interviewed John sheet
Hashemi and he had given me a whole new
dimension of this story carrying it on
to Madrid and the meetings with Karoubi
and there was a sense of momentum and
even excitement about the way the story
was was developing suddenly after all
this time of grubbing around with little
tiny details suddenly there was a modest
breakthrough and so they said their
documentary was getting put together and
they were getting ready to go on the air
with it and we agreed very clearly that
it probably would be very useful to have
something in print to go along with the
television show so I figured you know at
some point I'm gonna have to write about
this and this seems to be the moment to
do it because we now had all of this
together so I called my friend at the
op-ed page and I said I'm ready are you
ready and she said let's see what you've
got so I wrote on a piece that I thought
was three times too long but I said it's
hard to compress this story into a few
sentences and I said take a look at it
and see if you think you can edit it
down to make something out of it they
thought about it for several days called
me back and said we're prepared to go
with it but we needed to be a little
longer got it have answers to this and
that and then we went into an intensive
editing phase word by word phrase by
phrase that went on for I've forgotten
most seemed like a good part of a week
they knew that front line was coming out
on Tuesday and the New York Times not
wanting to be scooped said we'll make
room for it on Monday and much to my
amazement gave me almost the entire
op-ed page for this article it was
amazing and in frontline care I mean
they liked the idea you're gonna hit the
New York Times first I think we had
mixed emotions on one hand I think they
were happy to have a mainstream
publication coming out with the same
story at the same time they were and it
lent real credibility and real punch to
to the story it got people's attention
and I think a lot of people looked at
the frontline story that would not have
I mentioned it in my in the op-ed page
so I mean so the op-ed piece mentions
the fact that frontline is going to be
doing this the next day on the other
hand like all journalists I think there
were those who thought it would be great
if we were out there first and
that's but I I can't speak for frontline
and I thought they were basically pretty
happy with the result they got they got
tremendous numbers on that show in terms
of listeners tuning in on the last page
where you sign off and in your book you
have make this statement
Barbara Honaker deserve a special
mention why well as I said in the when
to read on from there that I didn't
agree with Barbara on many many issues
we didn't work together at all she was
not part of this little group that
worked together the Barbara Honaker
wrote a book also called October
Surprise not only how could he do that
there's absolutely you can have 15 books
by the same name the same year if you
want to this you can't copyright a book
title and in fact there often are two or
three books by the same title that was
that was an editorial decision on the
ground that this phrase has come to
simply represent this story and the
trying to come up with a more elegant
title in effect people would know what
they were talking about and this at
least somebody looks at that cover they
know what the book is about it's not
it's truth in advertising if there's
nothing else but any case she had
written the book that came out in 1989
called October Surprise I disagreed with
many of the things in that book but she
had been absolutely dogged in her
pursuit of this story and she had
uncovered a number of sources and an
uncovered amount of information and kept
the story alive at a time when
absolutely nobody believed in it at all
so I thought that at a minimum
she deserved credit for the work that
she has done for which in many cases she
is not guiding got much appreciation
even for me so this was I'm not sure
it's fair to ask you this but why is it
that the executive intelligence review
of LaRouche that publication was just
kind of cast aside Barbara honaker's
book was even made fun of by people and
then all of a sudden gary SiC is bought
by the New York
in front lion your book is out there
well maybe it's not a fair question to
ask me because you need to ask somebody
else why they did that let's face it I'm
a fairly mainstream person I was a
retired Navy captain 24 years of Navy
intelligence work I was in the Defense
Department for a number of years I was
in the White House for six years I
worked for three different presidents in
the White House I got out I worked for a
very conservative organization I mean I
worked for the the for the Ford
Foundation doing program work for them
I had done work on the Middle East and I
you know and so forth it's a it's a very
sort of conservative mainstream kind of
it's not necessarily a routine kind of
CV but it it is at least one that people
can look at and say well gee this this
guy at least is not a crazy coming out
of left field and I did have I had
written for The New York Times before
I'd written I don't know three or four
different op-ed pieces for them at
various times in the past I'd also
written for the Washington Post and I
had done commentary on national
television at the time of the Gulf War
and you know I had done a lot of work so
my name was known to a lot of people and
I think that people who would have said
that's ludicrous
that story is unbelievable I will have
nothing to do with it if they said you
know if he's buying this maybe just
maybe it deserves another look just to
see and I think there was a sort of
mixture there in the end who knows what
what the outcome of this will be but
initially it seems to me that was the
that was what and that's what motivated
people to to give me if you like a
second reading getting back to the the
premise of the book on page 146 you say
none of the principles involved have
ever spoken publicly about what happened
and there will never be a full account
of the discussions until that happened
and on the same page you say that in
this meeting there were six Israelis 16
Iranians in 12 Americans why haven't any
of those people spoken up well and have
my socks I said I said principals
because some of the people there have in
fact spoken up and very few of them very
very few I have tried very hard to talk
to specific individuals who had reason
either to know what was going on or to
have been there in my view this was a
covert political action covert actions
are done in secrecy people are pledged
to keep their mouth shut and for the
most part they do people take those
pledges very seriously partly because
they take a sort of secrecy oath but
beyond that they know that they're going
to be implicated in the thing so they
have every reason in the world to keep
their mouth shut unless as some of the
people who have served the sources for
this they really have nothing left to
lose they've been indicted they're in
trouble they feel that they've been
deserted by the people that they worked
with or they were in very marginal
characters who really had no part in the
major part of the thing and so you get a
little piece of the puzzle so it's not
surprising that the sources that show up
for this are not Boy Scouts and Sunday
School teachers I mean that's not the
kind of people that they used for the
thing and those are not the kind of
people that are now ready to go public
the principles I think have not talked
and how my feeling is the only way
you're ever going to get the principles
to talk and even that is not going to be
easy is with some kind of congressional
investigation that has subpoena power
and that is that is the necessary
element to get beyond this that doesn't
mean that you solve all of your problems
immediately but it does mean at least
you're in a position to begin dealing
with them where did you grow up Kansas I
was born in Russell Kansas same hometown
as Bob Dole and our inspector doesn't
matter
Arwen grew up there i went to high
school read the same class no neither
one of them we didn't know each other in
Russell none of the three of us did but
I think it's kind of interesting this
little town of 6,000 people right out on
the bear plains of Kansas it's a lovely
spot and I my mother the book is
dedicated to my mother and I and I make
a point of getting out to Kansas as
often as I can
and I always enjoy going back but it's a
tiny little town and I went to the
University of Kansas and when and
basically a by whole life there and only
later on
did I leave I the Navy provided my
mobility I guess to to leave Kansas and
would you study I was a French major in
college French literature as a matter of
fact I my specialty was 19th century
French poetry and 19th and early 20th
century most of which I have now
forgotten though not the French I after
college I got a fellowship and went to
France for a year lived with the French
family again studied literature but
mostly studied France I traveled around
for a year and then went into the Navy
and went to the Middle East a lot of
time in the Persian Gulf North Africa in
the Mediterranean what was your first
year in the Navy my first year in the
Navy was in the flagship in the Persian
Gulf
what year 1958 and did you get
interested in the Middle East before did
you ask for that ask for that well what
I asked for
I was interested in intelligence work
because I it appealed to me because this
sort of putting puzzles together was
something that I really enjoyed doing
and I thought I would enjoy the work and
that was the only place that there was
an intelligence job available when
when I was assigned to their to the
flagship in the Persian Gulf I didn't
know where the Persian Gulf was I had to
get out a map and and find out where it
was and I had a great geography lesson
in a year of sailing around the Indian
Ocean and Persian Gulf places that were
wonderfully exotic and colorful and I in
a sense for a small-town boy from from
Kansas it was sort of join the Navy and
see the world and I've seen an awful
part of the world where did you go after
that first year from the Persian Gulf
I went curiously enough for a period in
Paris with some language training and
then went down to Morocco and was
working in the there was a naval
installation a Navy Basin in Morocco
that put out a monthly magazine on
political events in the Middle East and
so I spent it was like up like a year of
being a reporter on a magazine and I
learned a lot about the Middle East and
of course of that year read a lot and
wrote a lot and I enjoyed writing it's a
great joy to be able to turn out
articles every two weeks or something
like that and what are you coming on to
be a full lieutenant
pretty soon at that point I was I guess
I was I made lieutenant I guess while I
was in while I was in Morocco where from
there well then I would have had a
wonderful I got married while I was in
Morocco and my wife had been at Kansas
University with me and we went back got
married and then traveled through France
for a wonderful month and then came back
to the States and I had a series of
assignments in in Washington I went to
the Naval Intelligence School in here in
Washington and then later went out to
Fort Meade Maryland and was watching
Soviet missiles and naval activities
from that vantage point and then went
off to Cairo is the assistant naval
attache I was in Cairo from 65 to 67 was
there at the beginning of the
Erebus reward the Six Day War I watched
it from the other end the receiving end
and stand on the roof of the embassy in
Cairo and watch the Israeli planes
coming in to hit the desert sites you
literally within sight flying around on
the edge the outskirts of the city
shrapnel falling on your head from over
CFM above as they were firing off flak
guns trying to knock down these
airplanes and made a I was in one of the
people that was involved in setting up
the evacuation of Americans from from
Egypt drove down to Cairo and tried to
organize an evacuation and very exciting
period of time I loved Egypt I still do
and have been back a few times since
that time my daughter was born in Egypt
how many kids to have a son and a
daughter after Cairo what in the Navy
Carol I came back we were evacuated from
there spent a short time in Greece and
ended up in Italy with the 6th fleet and
again was stationed in Naples loved
Italy and my daughter loved it so much
that she's gone back and she now lives
in Italy and become an Italian actually
she's Italian is just perfect we left
there came back I went to the Naval War
College and then after that I got a
master's degree in international
relations while I was at the War College
and then went to Colombia that the Navy
has this wonderful program that a few
people a year are funded to get PhDs and
I was lucky enough to be one of those
and went to Colombia for three years did
all the coursework in the dissertation
finished my PhD came down to Washington
I wrote my my dissertation on the notion
great power politics in the Indian Ocean
and that got me a job in the office of
the Secretary of Defense working on the
Persian Gulf and Indian Ocean issues
what year is this now that was in 1973 -
76 and they secretary defense is well
now Larry James Schlesinger was James
Schlesinger camin Hall I was
there that would basically Schlessinger
time that's the guy I work for most
there were over other people before but
it was really Schlessinger that was the
I wrote some stuff for him and was
involved with with him but he had
commander at this point in the Navy yep
I was a commander at that time yeah
that's right and then went from there
because of my work in that in the
Secretary of Defense's circle system how
the first security affairs I got to know
a number of people in the White House in
the National Security Council and when
President Ford was facing election as
often happens people jump ship they get
out while they're rolodex is still hot
and go to work for a consulting firm or
something and then after the election
people flood back in again and they're
always a lot of holes in over there in
the White House staff during that last
year or so six months to a year and so I
was invited to come over to the NSC
staff I thought that's a pretty bad
offer I'll go over there work for six
months get kicked out when the new
people come in whichever way the
election goes and then I'll be out of a
job and I'll have to go scrambling but I
did it anyway I thought I thought it
would be a great place to watch an
election from and it turned out to be a
great place to watch the election from
the Carter people came in after the
election I thought I would be sent back
over to the Department of Defense and
they said stay on he a captain yet I was
not but I was then in before the end of
the Carter Administration I was promoted
to captain and that's the rank you left
the Navy what's the rank Arthur maybe
you're on the NSC staff how many people
are on the staff at that point about as
I recall around 50 professionals it's
pretty small you write in the conclusion
although I was a Democrat I had served
nearly half of my career under
Republican presidents why did you feel
the need to put that in the book because
I know that I'm going to be accused of
political partisanship people are gonna
say this is a political hatchet job
you're just going after George Bush you
want to embarrass him it's a political
season etc and there's no way I can
avoid that I mean I know that that
charge is going to
go with it the way I actually got into
this book was not a carefully plotted
event but it does come at a political
time it is going to be seen as a
political document and so I at least
want to make my position clear I mean
that this is where I am and I've always
been a Democrat and though I've never
worked in political campaigns I've never
been an an activist and I think most
people these until this book came out
probably regarded me is generally
nonpartisan I've never really
participated in partisan political
activities
this book is likely to be used in a
partisan way it's not written in a
partisan way but it's likely to be used
in a partisan way and there's really
nothing I can do about that did you find
many Democrats in the Navy and in the
officer corps we didn't talk politics
seriously no we really didn't talk
politics very much and I honestly
couldn't answer your question I mean I I
I know that some people were Democrats
and some people Republicans but in to
say did you meet a lot of them I simply
didn't identify people that I work with
as Republicans or Democrats you say in
the book and I know that I can find the
there's a line here and you know what
I'm talking about where you say that you
oh he said I would not be human if I did
not confess that I have at one time or
another awakened in the middle of the
night with the thought what if all these
people are lying to me is it possible
that all these accounts are themselves a
conspiracy of lies why did you put that
because it's true
you can't work on a story this big this
complicated in this dangerous dangerous
to your own professional career and to
your own reputation without asking
yourself that question and I must say
that I've answered that question to my
own satisfaction that
I when I finally decided I was going to
write this book and in the course of
writing the book I believe that the
degree of the number of coincidences
that occur in this story that if you are
going to show that this was a conspiracy
of Lies you have to invent another
massive conspiracy theory to say that
all of these people have been secretly
exchanging information among themselves
that they've got some motive which is
not easy to determine and why they would
all be going to this immense effort to
put out this story it's not clear that
any of them are benefiting from it in
fact many of them have been really
seriously hurt by the story and the fact
that it came out personally vilified you
know they've lost jobs in many cases
lost money and in some cases had been
threatened with court cases I mean
Richard brenneke was subjected to a
perjury trial I mean it's not clear that
they had much to gain from doing this
but you have to come up with a theory
what do they all have to gain how was it
all fit together how were these people
planted job sheet hashing me Francis my
the source that I used probably as much
as anyone in the book he didn't come to
me and volunteer his story it took me a
year and a half of dealing with him
before he would finally begin to tell me
his story he had to really trust me
first and decide that you know that I
could be trusted to deal with this and
you know how did somebody plant him
there and have him you know go on for a
year and a half without telling me the
story if this was all part of a plot to
deceive me it's you know it's pretty
damn well done I'll say that if the plot
was done and finally I get to the point
where the coincidences are so
extraordinary that to explain them away
the conspiracy theory has to be bigger
than the real conspiracy and finally you
get to a point you say I believe it the
author of the book is Gary sick the
title is October Surprise thank you for
joining us it's a great pleasure
join us next Sunday when our guests will
be James wrested former executive editor
of the New York Times and author of the
recent book deadline a memoir mr. Reston
joins us to discuss the changes in
American journalism during the last 50
years that's next week on booknotes at
8:00 and 11:00 p.m. Eastern Time for a
printed transcript of tonight's book
notes send $5 to c-span transcripts care
of tape writer box 885 Lincolnshire
Illinois 600 6 9
[Music]
nearly 85% of members of Congress are
regular readers of roll call the news